Trump takes a victory lap as Gaza peace deal is signed: From the Politics Desk


Trump takes a victory lap as Gaza peace deal is signed
Analysis by Jonathan Allen
There’s plenty left to resolve in the Middle East, not least of which is the question of whether Palestinians will eventually have their own independent state. If each step toward a lasting peace is successful, it will take days, months, years and perhaps decades to assess the full scope of the success of the deal to end the war in Gaza that President Donald Trump brokered, blessed and signed.

But what is clear today is that the remaining living Hamas-held hostages have been released, Israeli defense forces have pulled back to defensive positions, more aid is making its way into Gaza, and the United States — with Trump leading the way — is at the center of an international coalition dedicating itself to maintaining peace and rebuilding Gaza.

It’s hard to find political leaders in the U.S., or elsewhere, who think those are bad outcomes.

Sen. Amy Klobuchar, D-Minn., a past and possibly future presidential candidate, nodded approvingly toward Trump in an X post today.

“After more than 2 years, prayers were answered after the President and others reached an agreement to bring the Israeli hostages home,” she wrote. “This is a significant step toward a durable resolution of the war. We must work to end the humanitarian crisis and secure a lasting peace.”

Outside the U.S., Trump’s ability to attract and maintain the trust of both Israel and a host of Arab- and Muslim-majority nations, spanning from the Middle East across the Indian Ocean, is a rare diplomatic feat. It required him to take a harder line with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu than modern American presidents have been willing to draw.

The Knesset, the Israeli parliament, greeted Trump with a standing ovation when he spoke there. Egyptian President Abdel Fattah El-Sissi gave Trump his country’s highest civilian honor later in the day.

“This is the historic dawn of a new Middle East,” Trump said in his remarks.

If that is indeed the case, Trump may well yet win the Nobel Peace Prize he seeks.