How Trump Brokered the Israel-Hamas Peace Deal
Donald Trump reversed the Biden policy of leaning on Israel to make concessions and instead backed the U.S. ally as it put military pressure on Hamas.

Speaker 1: From the Opinion pages of The Wall Street Journal, this is Potomac Watch.

Paul Gigot: Donald Trump announces a ceasefire deal in Gaza that includes the immediate return of all Israeli hostages held by Hamas--alive or dead. Could this be a prelude to a larger piece in the Middle East? And why did Hamas suddenly change its mind on the Trump peace plan? Welcome, I'm Paul Gigot here on Potomac Watch, the daily podcast of Wall Street Journal Opinion. And I'm here with Elliot Kaufman who covers the Middle East for us, and we'll analyze the Gaza Peace deal, why it happened, and what to look for here in the coming weeks. First, let's listen for a moment to the moment on Wednesday when Marco Rubio, the Secretary of State, told Donald Trump that a deal was at hand.

Speaker 3: Okay. Yeah, I was just given a note by the Secretary of State saying that we're very close to a deal in the Middle East.

Paul Gigot: All right, so not much more than that. Trump then took to social media as he often does, Elliot, and announced the deal in fairly grandiose terms. But it does look like this is holding. Hamas and the Arabs have agreed to this. Most of the Arab world is rallying around it. The Israeli cabinet's voting on it as we speak, but the Prime Minister clearly is behind it. And you can tell by the reaction in Israel in videos of people celebrating in the streets and so on, that they seem to think that this is a good deal too. I guess the key question is why do you think Hamas finally agreed?

Elliot Kaufman: It's the key question because there are terms of this deal that Hamas had not agreed to previously and nobody thought it would either. And those are namely releasing all 20 remaining living hostages up front right away so that its best leverage is gone after that. That's number one. And number two is doing that while Israeli troops are still in most of Gaza, over 50%, just over 50% of Gaza, they would stay in even after receiving back all of those hostages.

Paul Gigot: How much of the territory will Israel have to move out of here in the first stage of this deal?

Elliot Kaufman: So right now they're in a little more than three quarters of the territory. So we're talking about leaving a quarter of Gaza for this, but then staying in over 50%, being able to remain there until Hamas is disarmed and Gaza is demilitarized. So major concessions there. Your question is a great one. Why? And there I would look to two things. One, Israeli military pressure and two, pressure from Hamas's patrons, Hamas's allies, Qatar, Turkey, Egypt. Egypt, I wouldn't quite call an ally in that sense. So where did these come from? First of all, Israeli military pressure, which everyone had given up on. Everyone said they're no longer accomplishing much of anything in Gaza even the Israeli defense establishment. The top Israeli generals thought that these latest offensives weren't really going to put any new substantial pressure on Hamas.

Paul Gigot: And this is the one that is going back into Gaza City.

Elliot Kaufman: Exactly. Gaza City, Hamas's capital. However, from the very start of that, in late August, Hamas seemed to view it differently. First, Hamas, after resisting it for months said, "Okay, we would take a partial hostage deal to release 10 hostages up front." Prime Minister Netanyahu said, "That's not good enough. We need all the hostages at once." And the reaction just about everywhere was, "Well, that's never going to happen." So clearly he must not want a deal at all.

Paul Gigot: Right.

Elliot Kaufman: But then as this military offensive continued really, and in fact quite easily encircling Gaza City, squeezing Hamas and threatening to really demolish its capital, Hamas has agreed to this, all the hostages at once at the start.

Paul Gigot: So military pressure. And then the question of the Arab pressure, and I guess my question is, I mean their big patron in the Arab world has been Qatar, okay, financial aid, a lot of it, and diplomatic intermediary role with Israel and the West. Do you think that the Israel strike on Hamas leaders in Doha sometime back widely criticized, including by the President of the United States, nonetheless may have sent a message to the ruling Al Thani family in Qatar that, "Hey, maybe we ought to try to get out of this and end this."

Elliot Kaufman: I think so. It seems to have gotten the ball rolling on that because remember, I mean, this has been going on for two years now. The Biden administration asking the Qataris for help on various things, even renewed the US lease on Al Udeid air base and seemed to have extracted nothing really in return for it. We didn't know if Qatar even had the power to really coerce Hamas. It seems like it did. And what happened was this strike threatened the Al Thani family's ability to play the double game to host the US military and Hamas's leadership to say the right things in English. But Al Jazeera in Arabic pumped Hamas propaganda, an anti-American propaganda. Suddenly the war was brought home there, and this in itself may not have been enough, just this threat. But then of course there's how Mr. Trump played it. He did not back the strike in part because it didn't actually kill the Hamas leaders that it was intended to.

Paul Gigot: It didn't hit the targets.

Elliot Kaufman: And yet as a failed strike, it may have succeeded in this way a threat on the one hand, that's the sticks, carrots from President Trump, on the other hand, a security guarantee via executive order. It's a pretty serious combination.

Paul Gigot: That was last week.

Elliot Kaufman: That was just last week.

Paul Gigot: Right.

Elliot Kaufman: And then Hamas finds itself squeezed and demanded that it sign on the dotted line.

Paul Gigot: All right, we're going to take a break and when we come back, we'll talk about how the peace agreement is playing inside Israel when we come back. Welcome back. I'm Paul Gigot here on Potomac Watch and I'm talking to Elliot Kaufman of the journal editorial page on the Peace Deal in Gaza. Let's talk about this from the Israeli point of view and let's listen to a spokesman for Prime Minister Netanyahu.

Speaker 5: We have hit a critical point in this war. From day one of this war, the Prime Minister laid out three objectives, the return of all of our hostages, the defeat and dismantling of Hamas, and ensuring Gaza no longer poses a threat to Israel. All of the Prime Minister's objectives have now been achieved. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu last night announced approval of the first phase of the plan for all of our 48 hostages to be released by Hamas terrorists who have held our innocent people for 734 days.

Paul Gigot: So the Prime Minister's office there taking a victory lap saying that their goals have been achieved. That conventional wisdom now in Washington, I'm talking about the media conventional wisdom and the kind of professional think tanks and so on that are mostly anti-Israel, particularly in regard to this war. Their conventional wisdom now is that what really happened here is that Trump finally squeezed Netanyahu, that he basically demanded that you have to do this, sign on to this and that that is what has changed the game here. That this is by Netanyahu is merely him making a virtue of necessity.

Elliot Kaufman: It is an interesting argument, but it cannot account for two things. First is these Hamas concessions, which we just laid out. That's what got this deal done. And that wasn't achieved by pressuring Netanyahu by pressuring Israel, that was achieved by pressuring Hamas. Second is that this deal releasing all the hostages at once up front. That's what Netanyahu said he wanted and that's what he ended up getting. And so there was Trump pressure on Israel, on Netanyahu at the very end to overcome some objections about various parts of this twenty-point deal because there's a lot still up in the air.

Paul Gigot: Different stages of the deal.

Elliot Kaufman: Exactly, especially for this second phase. And things could go wrong. And Netanyahu's spokeswoman says that all of the war aims are achieved. I wouldn't go that far yet. The deal could achieve Israel's war aims, disarming Hamas, demilitarizing Gaza, making sure Hamas doesn't rule Gaza and isn't a threat. That hasn't yet happened. It will need to happen. But I think what this deal provides is that Israel and its troops can remain in a position to try to secure those outcomes even after its hostages have come home.

Paul Gigot: The Israeli military position remaining position in Gaza, even after this initial step back from some territory, are key positions when it comes to smuggling operations into Hamas, right?

Elliot Kaufman: Yes.

Paul Gigot: Well, particularly over in the Philadelphi corridor between Gaza and the border of Gaza and Egypt, that's been a key smuggling route and it's allowed Hamas to rearm and to build those tunnels. So if those are blocked, that helps a lot on the question of disarmament. But I think it's really crucial, particularly to your point about the second war aim, which is disarming Hamas, destroying Hamas and demilitarizing Gaza because there's still a lot of weapons there. You know that Hamas's calculation, certainly for the most militant wing, will be, all right, we've got to cut a deal here rather than lose all of our fighting forces because Trump will support Netanyahu to do so if we don't sign onto this. We will give up the hostages, live to fight another day, and hope that we can co-opt the process in the future and ultimately quietly rearm and then be in a strong position to actually regain our dominance over Gaza. That has to be, in my mind, the calculation of many of the Hamas fighters.

Elliot Kaufman: I think that has to be it. And the end state where Hamas wants to get is probably something like Lebanon before this recent war in that there is officially a Lebanese government that is not a terrorist group called Hezbollah, but Hezbollah has this huge army and really is the power behind the throne. Hamas would love that in Gaza, that's how it escapes from this. Okay, you have your official government Palestinian technocrats, but we really run things on the ground.

Paul Gigot: I can't imagine that Israel will tolerate that.

Elliot Kaufman: It certainly doesn't want to, and will need to enforce these terms so that doesn't end up happening. And for that it will need some cooperation from this Arab-led stabilization force, which is supposed to take over progressively areas of Gaza and keep Hamas down. But I think the Israelis know they can only rely on that force for so much, and that really they will have to act against Hamas no matter what. And that means raids, it means security operations. It means not leaving some of the territory a buffer zone, certainly under this deal. And I think part of Israel's confidence with this plan is that it has a US administration, a US government that will allow it to implement this deal and make sure Hamas doesn't regain power just for the sake of peace quiet de-escalation.

Paul Gigot: To extend your analogy with the Lebanon and Hezbollah, I remember in 2006 when there was the Hezbollah war with Israel, I remember Secretary of State Condi Rice telling me that this UN stabilization force that was put in would prevent the remilitarization of the border with Israel. And Lebanon of course didn't do that because it just wasn't willing to run the risk of fighting with Hezbollah whose fighters are ruthless and would've started to kill some of these UN soldiers. So that's the issue here that will come to the fore, I think before too long in Gaza as well. Will the stabilization force be willing to actually confront Hamas fighters or Islamic Jihad fighters, which still exists in Gaza, another Jihadist group, to disarm them, to destroy the tunnels. All of that very much remains to be seen.

Elliot Kaufman: And if they don't, how much freedom of action will Israel have to do some of those things itself?

Paul Gigot: Right, exactly. All right, let's talk a little bit about, step back here a little bit. How did we get to this point and what does it say about Trump's negotiating on foreign policy? And I ask this question because I think a crucial turning point was actually the Biden administration leaving office and Trump coming in. And in many ways, to my point of view, what Trump did was he reversed the US position. The Biden strategy, particularly for the last year and a half of, since the early stages of October 7th it was fully on board for Israel, but you saw the slow turn where Biden began to say, "We've got to pressure Israel to cut a deal because we want this war to end." And it did so in a way that I think gave Hamas the belief that it could ride this out, that the US would not support Israel in the clinches. And so it was willing to refuse to return the hostages and sign onto the deal that they've now signed on to. Trump comes in and he backs Netanyahu, he backs Israel and said, "All right, you're fighting this war. We're going to give you support for that." And then they gave support for the anti-Iran campaign for continuing to degrade Hezbollah and fighting the Iranian proxies and continuing to pressure Hamas. And with that confidence about American backing, Netanyahu not only felt more freedom of action, but when time came to say, "Okay, now Netanyahu, you've got to cut a deal." Netanyahu could do so because he figures, "I've got the American backing here, not only through this first stage of this new agreement, but going forward." What do you think of that extended soliloquy?

Elliot Kaufman: I think you're right. Look at this from Hamas's point of view. What is its political strategy for victory? It comes up about one of two ways. One way is international pressure over humanitarian suffering in Gaza causes the US president to buckle and put as much pressure as he possibly can on Israel. And then Israel has to say, okay, we're finished enough-

Paul Gigot: Because they can't afford to lose America.

Elliot Kaufman: Can't afford that, and so we'll stop short of our war aims and let Hamas survive to run Gaza. That's number one. Number two is escalation. Military escalation by the larger Iranian axis puts Israel in such danger, or again, it causes the US president to panic and turn to Israel that one way or another, Israel has to say, "Enough already, we need this over." And both of those avenues existed under Biden and then all of a sudden were closed under Trump. The political avenue, well, President Trump wasn't moved by left-wing protests, by biased international courts, by European leaders who are making grand statements, self-interested statements.

Paul Gigot: Calling for a two-state solution, even though there's no such thing as a Palestinian state to recognize.

Elliot Kaufman: Exactly. That wasn't working with Trump. Trump said, "Israel, unleash all hell if they won't release all the hostages." So that avenue was closed. And then military escalation, it started September, 2024 when Israel knocked Hezbollah down and out of the fight and the Biden administration was still in, but it actually opposed that every step of the way and told Israel, "Do not do it. Do not escalate." It was so successful, surprisingly, that they didn't ultimately block it once it got going.

Paul Gigot: Israel was so successful that Biden basically had to step back and say, "Wow, that worked."

Elliot Kaufman: Yeah, Hezbollah wasn't able to get off that second strike, which everyone had been waiting for. And then of course, Iran itself, where President Trump not only doesn't stop Israel in June from attacking Iran's nuclear program, ballistic missile program, senior military officials, but then once he sees Israel's initial success in that, he joins in and leaves that Iranian nuclear program in ruins. And so Hamas at that point looks and says, "Where's our political strategy? International pressure isn't going to get it done, and Iran is out of the fight, Hezbollah's out of the fight. How are we going to get Israel to end this?" And so it has to start thinking about simply worse alternatives.

Paul Gigot: And so this may be a kind of a situation where they want to cut their near-term losses, give some ground here, and then hope to reconstitute themselves once we get past stage one into stage two and beyond. We are going to take another break and when we come back, we'll talk about this significance of this Gaza agreement for the larger Middle East and the Abraham Accords when we come back. Don't forget, you can reach the latest episode of Potomac Watch anytime. Just ask your smart speaker, play the Opinion Potomac Watch podcast that is Play the Opinion Potomac Watch podcast.

Speaker 1: From the Opinion pages of the Wall Street Journal, this is Potomac watch.

Paul Gigot: Welcome back. I'm Paul Gigot here in Potomac Watch. I'm talking with Elliot Kaufman. The other question, related question is, what does this mean for the larger Middle East when it comes to Israel's ability to extend the Abraham Accords, which is its normalization with some of the Arab states, particularly with Saudi Arabia?

Elliot Kaufman: We will have to see, but I think there is reason for optimism. First of all, the Abraham Accords survived, which we should not take for granted.

Paul Gigot: It collapsed because of the war.

Elliot Kaufman: Yeah, two years-

Paul Gigot: Which was a goal of Hamas, by the way.

Elliot Kaufman: Absolutely. And we know that from its leader's private messages, but two years of war as bloody as can be in the headlines every day, sensationalized by Al Jazeera even more so.

Paul Gigot: TikTok.

Elliot Kaufman: TikTok, for sure, and yet that beachhead survives. Now, can it expand? The main barrier to that expansion was the continuation of the war. Saudi Arabia simply was not going to normalize relations with Israel while it's still in the act of bombing Gaza. So that is out of the way. However, Israel's image, which was never very good in the Arab Middle East, has taken a further hit. So some real damage has been done there. And yet you have these Arab states rallying around this Trump plan for Gaza. And what that means functionally is working with Israel on a day-to-day basis for how Gaza operates. That seems to me to be a step toward normalization, unofficially, if not officially, but under pressure from President Trump and proceeding with this economic integration of the region that Trump has been pushing. You could see this become official as well.

Paul Gigot: There's a tremendous economic logic to doing so just because MBS, the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, really is focused on the economic development of Saudi Arabia. And you need quietude in the Middle East. You can't do that with war going on all the time. And of course, Israel wants the same thing. This war for two years has taken a terrible cost, imposed a terrible cost on Israel because they've had to mobilize reserves, they've had to shut down the airspace at times. They've had to devote enormous resources to building up their defenses and their arsenal. And of course, just the human loss. How many thousands of Israeli soldiers have died?

Elliot Kaufman: Over 1000, yeah.

Paul Gigot: Over 1000. And of course, there's a human cost of Gaza civilians side of things, which has something like 67,000 I think died according to the UN. Now that includes Hamas fighters. And we always have to say that Hamas's strategy was to put civilian Gazans in the way and to protect them by basing themselves and schools and hospitals and mosques. And so the civilian casualties were much worse than they should have been, but that cost has been enormous. So if we could just end hostilities, there's a lot of benefit on both sides. It's interesting to watch the president now, of course, he has really described himself and described his motives for the second term to be the peace president, the peacemaker. And this succeeds he will have done so in the Middle East. I would note that the strategy he pursued here in the Middle East, which is backing an ally to the hilt against the adversaries, and putting pressure on the adversaries through the reposition of sanctions on Iran, for example, backing what it did against the proxies, hitting the Houthis in Yemen when he first came office is not the strategy he's pursued on Ukraine and Russia, where he has tried to put pressure on Ukraine in the first instance and tried to say to Putin, essentially to negotiate with him to get a deal. And of course, Putin says no and has refused to do anything to move in the direction of peace. So the president may be changing on that, but it's a very different strategies pursuit in the two places.

Elliot Kaufman: Yes. And how many presidents have thought that they could just reset relations with Russia and that Vladimir Putin was a reasonable man if you could just give him what he needed? It hasn't worked out that way. And I think in many ways you've had American leaders captivated by a theory. Wouldn't it be great if Russia were not this adversary? It would be great. But Russia makes its own choices. Putin makes his own choices. In this case, in the Middle East, President Trump has seen not only that allies can deliver for him with US backing, but that peace doesn't follow from pressuring that ally from cutting off arms to that ally as President Biden did with Israel. You have to actually confront these enemies and change their own internal calculuses to get them to contemplate a piece on anything like acceptable terms.

Paul Gigot: And so we have a peace deal that the President can consider a success I think at least in the first instance here, we'll see how it goes, but it's no small achievement. Elliot Kaufman, thank you and thank you all for listening to us on Potomac Watch. We are here every day talking about events in the world and in American politics. Thanks for listening.