Paul Gigot: President Trump orders a stunning military operation to capture Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro inside his fortress in Caracas, and it works without an American casualty. Remarkable military exercise. Maduro is now in a New York jail where he will be arraigned and put on trial. What comes next for Venezuela? And can the U.S. negotiate a transition of power from the Maduro dictatorship still run by Maduro's successors in Caracas to a democracy that is much more favorable to American interests? That's our subject for today on Potomac Watch, a daily podcast of the Wall Street Journal opinion pages. I'm Paul Gigot, and I am here today with my colleague, Mary Anastasia O'Grady, who is our longtime columnist on Latin Americas, covered Venezuela going back some 30 years now, Mary. Certainly you covered it from the beginning of the Chavista Revolution in the early 2000s. Let's listen first to Donald Trump talk about who's going to be running Venezuela now.
Donald Trump: We're dealing with the people that just got sworn in. And don't ask me who's in charge because I'll give you an answer and it'll be very controversial.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: What does that mean?
Donald Trump: We're in charge.
Paul Gigot: Well, okay. Mary, no hemming and hawing there about who's going to be running it. Trump says we're going to be running it. That's what he also said Saturday. But Marco Rubio on Sunday said, "Actually, we're not going to be running it. We'll be influencing them." And he said, "We are going to maintain our oil embargo on Venezuelan exports." And that will be enough to squeeze Maduro successors, including his immediate successor, Vice President Delcy Rodriguez, who's now in charge, now the new interim president, I guess, to bend her to American will. How do you see things evolving, Mary?
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Well, I think we should just be very clear about what happened on Saturday, which is that the U.S. went in in an incredibly sophisticated mission and took out the top of the regime, which is the dictator. But nothing else has changed. Delcy Rodriguez was considered the vice president, so she was the second in command, and she's now the commander-in-chief. She's part of this regime. I mean, in fact, if you list the five top people in the regime, her name is there, along with her brother, Jorge Rodriguez, Diosdado Cabello, who's the minister of the interior, and the defense minister, Vladimir Padrino, who's very close to the Russians. So it's pretty much status quo. The top generals have not moved. The opposition had said that they could expect that if the top of the regime was removed, the top military removed, that colonels and captains and the rank and file would like to see a return to democracy. But those top generals have not been removed. They have not shown any inclination to jump sides. So things are just as they were before without Nicolás Maduro.
Paul Gigot: Hard to square that with Trump's assertion that we are going to run the place. We don't have anybody on the ground there, whether it be diplomats or in a position to be able to run the country. The Cuban intelligence services presumably are still involved heavily in the support of the regime elements that are now still in charge. The argument of the administration is that the oil embargo, which will deny revenue to the regime, and then Trump's threats of doing it again, another military action, are what's going to get Rodriguez and company to bend to our will. And yet, as you say, none of them look like they're going to leave power soon. Delcy Rodriguez gave a very strong statement of opposition to the U.S. on Saturday. Trump threatened her on Sunday. Now on Monday, she has reportedly issued a new milder statement saying that they want to cooperate with the U.S., but this doesn't look like it's going to be easy.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Well, I'll give you the happy narrative, which is that behind the scenes, the Trump administration is telling her and Padrino and Cabello and her brother and the generals, that if they don't follow orders, Saturday is going to look like a walk in the park and things are going to get much tougher for them. Of course, that would involve the Trump administration taking the U.S. further into kinetic activities in Venezuela, I think. But that's the negotiation that's going on. You can either do this the easy way or the hard way. And if you decide to do it the easy way, you get visas, she gets a visa to someplace in the Middle East to live out her days and maybe even take some of the stolen money with her. But there is a path. They're not going to give visas and lots of money to 1,000 people or even 500 or even the top 300 generals. But they are negotiating different options that would involve these people who have power to get out so they could elevate, as I say, the mid-level officers who are interested in returning the country to democracy. That's the happy talk. I think that's going to take a little bit of time to convince them, or perhaps what Trump referred to on Saturday in the press conference from Mar-a-Lago, which he called a second stage, and that presumably would be more military action.
Paul Gigot: Yeah, he did promise that. He was asked if putting American boots on the ground would be a obstacle for his mind. He said, "No, I'd have no problem with that," which certainly does give more credibility to his threat. But Maduro clearly didn't believe him, and that's why Trump had to act. And the question is, will his successors in the power group there say, "Okay, well, he's serious now because of Maduro." Or will they say, which I think the Cubans and the Russians and the Chinese are all probably telling them, "No, stick it out. Trump doesn't have the willingness to really risk casualties." See, he's very casualty adverse, right, Mary?
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Exactly.
Paul Gigot: We emerged from this, one of the talking points out of this Pentagon operation is no Americans died. And that's tremendous credit to the military for pulling that off. But politically, that really helps in the U.S., but that probably wouldn't be the case if you're going to take out major elements of the Venezuelan military in another operation. And Rubio was very candid on that. I heard him on CBS's Face the Nation this weekend saying, "Well, it would've made no sense for us to try to run a higher risk operation by going after all these top officials other than Maduro."
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Yeah, I think that they may also be thinking he won't try this again. This was too sophisticated and it's too tough to duplicate it and so therefore we're safe. But the one thing that I think they maybe have them watching their backs is that there was obviously a lot of inside help from Venezuela. Yes, the CIA did an excellent job, but I think they must have agents on the ground there who were basically helping guide them and maybe even people inside his inner security detail, because the word from Caracas is that he was moving around. He would sleep in different places. Not totally different places, like five different places that he... So somehow they knew where he was, and that's got to be a little bit unsettling for them. People are fed up with this regime and they're also for sale in Venezuela. So using both of those options, I think the U.S. was able to do something that the Cubans didn't expect them to be able to do.
Paul Gigot: We are going to take a break. When we come back, we will talk about President Trump's focus on oil as a goal of American foreign policy on Venezuela and whether that makes sense when we come back. Welcome back. I'm Paul Gigot here with Mary O'Grady on the Wall Street Journal opinion podcast, Potomac Watch. Your scenario, the optimistic scenario has these top echelon folks leaving the country.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Yeah.
Paul Gigot: Okay, they still won't be running it. As I hear Trump and Rubio, what they seem to be saying is they can stay. They haven't said that explicitly, but they have said we'll work with her if she does the right thing. They're saying they can stay as long as they do the things we want them to do, which is to cooperate on migration, to cooperate on repatriating immigrants, cooperating on the oil industry, cooperating by ousting the Cuban, Iranian, Russian, Chinese influence there. Is that something that realistically these people can do if they remain in power? I mean, are they going to suddenly turn into pro-American centrists who like the gringo?
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Some of those things you just listed, they could do. They could repatriate Venezuelans. But Donald Trump has spent a lot of time in the last 48 hours talking about the oil industry in Venezuela, and I've talked to people in the industry and they say that you cannot have this kind of oil boom that he's describing with these guys in power. And the reason is because the oil companies are not stupid. I mean, Exxon never went back to Venezuela after the 1970s when they nationalized the oil industry. They got into Venezuela in the '90s because they bought Mobil.
Paul Gigot: Mobil. Mobil Oil, yeah.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Mobil Oil. That's how they got in there. They didn't go in otherwise. And of course they got burned. So look at Chevron. Chevron has been lobbying Donald Trump and doing all this business with the regime, but it's been pretty limited. They haven't put new investments in there. The Chinese are trying to get their money out. The Chinese are owed a lot of money by Venezuela. So the idea that people are going to suddenly, oh, Delcy Rodriguez says that our investments are secure, we're going back? And by the way, this is guaranteed for 15 years. Donald Trump's not going to be around. Who else is going to guarantee that? So I don't think that you can create a rule of law in a place with judicial security with these clowns in charge. I mean, it just doesn't-
Paul Gigot: Implausible. To put it gently.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Exactly.
Paul Gigot: All right. Let's listen to Marco Rubio though talk about the Venezuelan oil.
Marco Rubio: We don't need Venezuela's oil. We have plenty of oil in the United States. What we're not going to allow is for the oil industry in Venezuela to be controlled by adversaries of the United States. You have to understand, why does China need their oil? Why does Russia need their oil? Why does Iran need their oil? They're not even in this continent. This is the Western hemisphere, this is where we live and we're not going to allow the Western hemisphere to be a base of operation for adversaries, competitors and rivals of the United States.
Paul Gigot: Mary, that message is, I think, a good one. I think he's right, we don't really need the oil. The global markets are quite well supplied now. The price is under $60 a barrel and some of the American fracking wells aren't economic under $50, so Trump has to think about that. But denying that oil to our adversaries is more interesting. Particularly in the case of Cuba, it's propping up Cuba's dictatorship. And I think that that's partly what the embargo is about too, denying finances to the financing for Venezuela by other purchases of the oil. I will say though that the thing I don't like about Trump focusing on the oil so much is it makes it look like that's why we're doing this. It makes it look like we're mercenaries. It plays into the argument by the global left that this is all about commercialization and essentially the dominance by America of commercial business in Venezuela. I don't think that's what it's all about because we don't need the oil. What it's about fundamentally is trying to get rid of a regional menace who's terrorizing his own people and sending millions of refugees throughout the region to destabilize the region and even the United States and protecting our interests.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: I think the kindest thing you can say about Trump's comments on oil is that they're unfortunate. I have other words that I won't use right now, but I think Marco Rubio is right that a lot of this has to do with getting these bad actors out of the hemisphere. And I tell you, beyond oil, one of the things that Nicolás Maduro is accused of is providing diplomatic passports for drug runners. That's what he's being indicted for in Manhattan. But beyond that particular accusation, the regime has been giving Venezuelan passports to Middle Eastern actors, Syrians, Iranians. They would go to Venezuela. They would fly there. There was a direct flight from Tehran to Caracas.
Paul Gigot: Amazing.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: And they would be given Venezuelan passports so they could move around the hemisphere with no suspicion. And the Canadians found out about this, I wrote a column about this some years ago, but those are the kinds of bad actors that Venezuela has been courting all of these years. That's the reason why this organized crime unit in Venezuela should be shut down. And it's unfortunate that the president is making this about oil, it's crazy. It makes no sense either economically or in terms of national security.
Paul Gigot: So the transition here to a new regime is, I think you and I would agree, is essential to making this work out in the end for Venezuela in particular, but also for the United States. And that raises the question of what role the opposition to Maduro is going to play. I was struck on Saturday to hear Trump be so dismissive of Maria Corina Machado, the opposition leader who won the Nobel Peace Prize recently for her pro-democracy efforts. He basically said she doesn't have the "respect" or support, enough support in the country to actually govern it. And then he followed that up yesterday on Sunday by saying, "She could only win an election if I support her." Sounding like she's a congressional candidate in Louisiana, but we do have to make here some kind of a transition to an election. I think to make this work, there has to be some kind of elections. Now, Trump also said we have to provide law and order before you can hold an election, which may be a decent point. And he did say he likes Machado, but it's striking to me that the administration hasn't been putting more of an emphasis on actually getting to a transition government and a democratically elected one, which is in this case, in this period of time, is likely to be pro-American. I mean, Venezuelans feel liberated now. A lot of them do.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Yeah. I think that's the key point. I mean, it doesn't matter if he likes Maria Corina or not. Basically, he should be talking about elections and also the political prisoners who are now in more danger than ever because-
Paul Gigot: How many are there?
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: I don't know. They're around 900 and living in very difficult circumstances. And now, they may suffer a lot of just revenge tactics against them for what happened. But the main thing is, I don't think he needed to say that he thinks Maria Corina is the leader of the opposition or she's so wonderful or anything else. He didn't have to talk about that. All he had to do was say, "We're in a military operation right now because we are still in the military operation. The regime has not changed. And when the military operation is over, we'll go to the political phase of this in which there'll be new elections." And as to whether she could win without his support, I mean, maybe he wants to talk to Herschel Walker. I don't know.
Paul Gigot: Oh, that's rough. He was the Senate candidate in Georgia who lost. That is the State of Georgia. We are going to take another break and when we come back, we'll talk about the implications of the Venezuela action for the rest of the region, Latin American region, especially Cuba when we come back. Don't forget, you can reach the latest episode of Potomac Watch anytime. Just ask your smart speaker, play the opinion Potomac Watch podcast. That is play the opinion Potomac Watch podcast.
Speaker 1: From the opinion pages of the Wall Street Journal, this is Potomac Watch.
Paul Gigot: Welcome back. I'm Paul Gigot here on Potomac Watch with Mary Anastasia O'Grady. I want to talk about the implications for the region here, particularly Cuba, Mary. And let's listen to Marco Rubio on Saturday talk about Cuba.
Marco Rubio: Cuba is a disaster. It's run by incompetent senile men, and in some cases, not senile, but incompetent nonetheless. It has no economy, it's in total collapse. And by the way, all of the guards that help protect Maduro, this is well known, their whole spy agency, all that were full of Cubans. I mean, they basically, it's amazing. This poor island took over Venezuela in some cases. One of the biggest problems that Venezuelans have is they have to declare independence from Cuba. They tried to basically colonize it from a security standpoint. So yeah, look, if I lived in Havana and I was in the government, I'd be concerned.
Paul Gigot: Good statement there by Marco Rubio. The Secretary of State clearly understands the Cuban threat here in the region and what it does. And you've been chronicling this for many, many years. I would say the preeminent chronicler of Cuban despotism in the global press, Mary, and also its nefarious operations in Venezuela and elsewhere in the region. And that liberation from Cuba is going to be essential for Venezuela, but let's play this out a little bit. And let's say the transition in Venezuela works and Cuba's ousted, Russia ousted, China ousted. What are the implications for Cuba?
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Well, it's difficult in Cuba. I mean, as Secretary of State Rubio said, the circumstances on the ground there right now are just horrific. I mean, it's already in a humanitarian crisis. Water, medicine are scarce, food is scarce. There are epidemics of contagious diseases like dengue fever. They can't generate electricity. The grid is completely broken down. And there's no civil society. I mean, the difference between Cuban and Venezuela is that Venezuela has at least some memory. I mean, you mentioned that I started writing about the Chavistas many years ago, but at least, I mean, I'm still alive and I remember what Venezuela was like a little bit before this government came along. So in the case of Cuba, I mean, there's no institutional memory about civil society, things like the Bar Association or the Rotary Club or anything like that. So you'd really be starting from scratch. I think a U.S. occupation would be a mistake, but you could do some kind of a Latin American multilateral force, but it's going to need a lot of leadership. You're going to have to start from scratch in terms of the rule of law, a judiciary, elections, all those things. It's going to really be starting from the bottom.
Paul Gigot: That's assuming that the government in Havana fell.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Right. I think in terms of the government in Havana falling, one of the things that we'll be keeping an eye on is whenever Raul Castro goes to his reward in heaven or elsewhere.
Paul Gigot: I'm betting on the latter.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: But I think some of those old guard, I mean Secretary of State Rubio said that they're senile. They're pretty old, most of the people who are considered sort of the fathers of the revolution and you have these new guys in place. And there are rumors going around that they're negotiating with the U.S. at this point. I haven't been able to confirm those rumors, but it wouldn't surprise me if they-
Paul Gigot: The leaders in Cuba?
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Yeah, offspring of the Castro family. Wouldn't surprise me because they saw what happened to Maduro and they've been buying property for many years in other countries around the world. So they do have in mind, they have lots of money and they could live out their days somewhere else. And they look at the mess they have on their hands and they know they can't fix it. So if they get an offer from the U.S., they might take it and then the hard part starts.
Paul Gigot: Right, because you'd have to really change everything in how the place is governed.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: The really good news is that Cuba would no longer be a center of espionage for the Chinese and the Russians. I mean, Cuba's been kind of the originator of a lot of violence throughout Latin America for like 60 years because they were trying to expand this revolution around the region. So to get rid of that would be a big gain.
Paul Gigot: Just step back a bit here and look the Trump first year and this action, the bombing of the nuclear program in Iran, now you have this decapitation of Maduro. If Trump can make this transition government work in Venezuela, and you have a pro-American government, preferably after a democratic election, the domino effect here on Cuba, if that were to happen, the negotiations you talk about or a domino effect there, and then we have the protests in Iran. So this would be a remarkable set of events if they flow in that direction, that would make the world a much better, safer place. Now, obviously it depends on actual results, and if this merely becomes a decapitation of Maduro with similar bad actors in charge, then I think it will be deemed to have essentially been a nice military operation but a political strategic failure. But if it works out, the ramifications for a better world are significant. Do you agree with that?
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: I agree with that. I think that's why I think it's so unfortunate that Trump cannot speak with more precise language, because at Mar-a-Lago on Saturday, there was an opportunity to make the case, and there is a strong case for elections, for freedom, for the political prisoners getting out of jail, all the things that make what he did the absolute right thing to do. But instead, he chose to talk about oil and American consumption of cocaine. And I don't have an optimistic narrative for either one of those things. I mean, I think the cocaine problem is a demand problem, and he might like to go after Columbia next, but there's going to be a limit to the resources that he can use to pick off all these countries. I think the better path would be to continue with what he did, which is a really brilliant move on Saturday morning, and to focus on making sure that we don't... I mean, this idea that we're going to somehow work with this regime to create an oil boom in Venezuela is preposterous.
Paul Gigot: Certainly in the short term, the oil boom is going to be a long way off. And as you say, the oil companies aren't going to invest billions if they think the same folks are in charge.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Exactly. So that's where we're at right now. I'm hoping that behind the scenes, something much different is happening. And when you listen to Secretary of State Rubio, it's more comforting because you get the idea that there is a plan in place and a vision for something that's much better for the Western hemisphere.
Paul Gigot: And maybe there is significant work going on behind the scenes to try to break the military and turn them away from that top echelon of dictatorship and pro-Cuban influence. But I say all this because it's a pretty big moment, Mary. I think it's a big moment of opportunity. Some risk, yes, but a big moment of opportunity. I don't think anybody, certainly Joe Biden or Barack Obama would never have done anything like this. And I'm wary that even somebody like George W. Bush would have. Now, H.W. Bush did it in Panama, but that was a smaller country and it turns out we had casualties in that operation.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Well, Reagan did something in Grenada.
Paul Gigot: In Grenada, small island.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: Small island, yeah.
Paul Gigot: But you're right, I had forgotten about Grenada.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: I think this is a big opportunity.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: One thing that might be interesting to keep in mind is what happened in Nicaragua when Violeta Chamorro was elected because Ortega, who had been the dictator, finally said, "Okay, we accept the results of the election," but his military never gave up their weapons. They kept in control of the military. And of course, longer term, that ended up to be very costly. And today, Nicaragua is a terrible dictatorship, almost worse than Venezuela.
Paul Gigot: I think one of the reasons that Trump focuses on oil and drugs is I think he thinks those resonate in America somehow politically. And he's reluctant to use the word democracy and even freedom because he associates that and his political base in the U.S. associates that too much with George W. Bush's Iraq and Afghanistan operations. And he wants to separate those two to keep the MAGA troops in line as he uses force abroad.
Mary Anastasia O'Grady: That may be, but I think it would have a high cost. First of all, he has a very strong support in South Florida and among Venezuelans and Cubans. And not just Venezuelans and Cubans. Many Latin Americans like Donald Trump because they think that he represents American values over the values of where they came from. So if he abandons that cause, I think that would be costly for him in domestic politics. And also I'm afraid that, as I said, if it's all built on this oil fantasy and if oil doesn't pan out because basically the regime stays in place, that I think will be considered a failure. I mean, you pluck one guy out of Venezuela, but nothing else happens. I don't see how that's a big success.
Paul Gigot: I could not agree more, Mary. All right, you're going to get the last word here. Thank you all for listening to Potomac Watch. We are here every day with the WSJ Opinion Podcast. Thanks for listening.