War’s end is like waking up from a nightmare. You could see that in the relieved faces of people dancing in the streets in Israel and Gaza on Thursday night in celebration of a ceasefire that appears to be taking hold after two years of terrible conflict.Israelis and Palestinians — and a world watching in horror — have prayed for the guns to go silent. But it took the imperious, implacable personality of Donald Trump to ram a peace deal home. The blustering, go-it-alone president did it in an unlikely way: by listening to others and organizing a coalition that, by the end, included all major Arab and European nations, as well as Israel and Hamas.As news broke of the ceasefire agreement in Gaza, I thought back to a conversation I had in Tel Aviv with a senior Israeli official a month after Hamas’s horrific Oct. 7, 2023, terrorist attack. “We are so traumatized by what has happened to us that we won’t make good decisions about how to end this war,” he told me. “We need America to push us to make the right choices.”

President Joe Biden, for all his effort, couldn’t find a way to do that. But Trump did. He decided it was time for peace — and that he wouldn’t tolerate any more foot-dragging from Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu or Hamas. Today, the battlefield is finally quiet.
Trump’s peace plan could fall apart, obviously. This is the Middle East. Key details like disarmament of Hamas aren’t yet resolved. But in achieving his ceasefire, Trump demonstrated skills and used tactics that showed more flexibility and cooperation than are typical of him. He listened to expert advice and changed some of his views. He engaged in subtle secret diplomacy, especially with Qatar.
This wasn’t a diplomatic negotiation as much as a dealmaking consortium. Trump’s envoy Steve Witkoff didn’t know much about the Middle East. But he and Trump figured out who the smart guys in the room were. That group included Tony Blair, the former British prime minister with many contacts in the region and a Trumpian desire to rehabilitate his image, and Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law and architect of the Abraham Accords, hungry for another chance to make the Israel-Palestinian deal that eluded him in 2020.
A third, pivotal player was someone you’ve probably never heard of: Ali al-Thawadi, Qatar’s minister for strategic affairs. Photos of the Qatari negotiating team usually feature the skillful prime minister, Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al Thani. But Thawadi, like Witkoff, is a transactional player who likes to stay out of the limelight. He played a critical role in assembling the ceasefire coalition.
This account of the negotiations is based on conversations with Qatari, Israeli and American officials. The Qataris had been key intermediaries since the first hostage-release deal in November 2023. They were able to communicate with Mossad, the Israeli intelligence service with which they have had secret contact for more than a decade, and with Hamas political leaders living in Doha. The Qataris worked closely with the Biden administration, and they deepened that cooperation with the Trump team, helping mediate the Rwanda-Congo and Armenia-Azerbaijan conflicts. When Trump decided it was time to end the 12-day war between Iran and Israel, Qatar helped broker the deal.
Paradoxically, the breakthrough in the bloody Gaza stalemate came after Israel attacked Hamas leaders in Qatar last month. That shocked the Qataris, but it gave them leverage. They threatened to end their mediation effort unless Israel publicly apologized and the U.S. offered a security guarantee against future attacks. The Qataris got both, which helped them save face in the Arab world — and bolstered their clout.For Trump, too, the attack on Qatar was a turning point. He had shown Netanyahu in April that he would pursue his own course, with a surprise announcement while they were together in the Oval Office that Witkoff would open nuclear talks with Iran — accompanied by praise for Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, an antagonist of Israel. (“I happen to like him, and I know he likes me,” Trump said.)

When Trump learned of Israel’s impending attack, Witkoff called Thawadi to warn him — too late, it turned out. In the aftermath, Trump moved toward this week’s ceasefire despite Israel’s misgivings.
The Qataris took several steps that made the negotiations work. They suggested that Trump meet all the key Arab players — Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt and Jordan — in New York during the U.N. General Assembly. The group hammered out what became Trump’s 20-point plan for a ceasefire and “Board of Peace” to oversee the political transition in postwar Gaza. The Qataris also urged that Turkey, an Islamist state with leverage over Hamas, join the negotiating team.The final act came this week in Egypt, where Thawadi met with Ron Dermer, Netanyahu’s closest aide, to discuss remaining details. Though Dermer has sometimes been a fiery antagonist of Qatar, the conversations were frank and productive, according to a Qatari official. With Trump pushing hard, Israel agreed to procedures for an initial ceasefire and hostage-release deal, even though there’s no agreement yet on the crucial issue of how and when Hamas will be disarmed.
This is a peace deal with many details marked “TBD.” That’s the way Arabs often negotiate, and Israelis, too. Haggling over the precise shape of Trump’s “day after” plan will continue, but no longer with Israeli hostages captive underground. If Israel or Hamas obstruct a peace deal stamped “DJT,” there could be, as Trump likes to say, “hell to pay.”
Drawing a strategic balance sheet at the end of a war like this is hard, when the human cost is so high. Israel’s international standing has been tarnished, but its deadliest enemies — Hamas, Hezbollah and Iran — have been ravaged. The biggest winners might be the Arab gulf states, led by tiny Qatar, which have found a champion in the White House unafraid to give orders to Israel.

